Pushkin.
>> Previously on Revisionist History.
>> Had my wife just been murdered in my
home, I couldn't tell you nothing. My
mind's gone. But he knew everything in
detail. That's a red flag.
I can't remember how soon they figured
out that, you know, the preacher had
finished the job and all that, but it
was, you know, it was pretty obvious
pretty quick.
>> I just don't think some of these people
that were on the jury, they didn't want
that to be on their conscience the rest
of their life, putting somebody into the
death penalty.
35 years. That's how long Elizabeth's
family waited for justice to occur. 35
long years.
He was just having severe nightmares of
being executed over and over. He sort of
came out of the depression and then the
second execution came up.
So, at some point during your
conversations with him, he gets his
second warrant.
>> Yeah.
>> When is that?
>> So, he got a second warrant in November,
a year later for a January execution.
So, you know, they take you as soon as
they give you the warrant. By the way,
this is another particularly cruel
thing. This is a man who's been 34
years. He has a cell. He's, you know,
they they call it their house, their
cell. So his house was nice, you know,
he had his stuff in there and he and
once they take take you to the warden
and tell you, they don't take you back
to your cell. That's it. You get put in
the death chamber cell, which is this
totally isolated cell. Very hard.
>> Kate Porterfield, the psychologist hired
by Kenny Smith's legal team.
>> Once he was given the second warrant and
taken to the death chamber, did you lose
contact with him?
>> No. Oh, no. We were able to talk. We
talked up until about I think we talked
up until about December and then he got
very um you know, he he turned his
attention to facing what was probably
going to happen. His lawyers were
working very hard to still stop it. I
testified in a hearing about what I
believed was going to happen to him with
his post-traumatic stress if he had to
go through this again. And I I
testified, which I believe to be true,
that this man was going to go into a
state of such severe
symptomatic PTSD as to be really just
devastated, you know, to be to be taken
into that same thing again was going to
just be,
you know, catastrophic to his psyche.
>> Cruel and unusual.
>> Yeah. Well, and those words cruel and
unusual is like the legal term. And so
what I was saying is this man's going to
be absolutely devastated with in his
psyche and disorganized and and
completely symptomatic because he's got
a severe condition that you guys did to
him. By the way, that was brought about
by what was done. So this was not a guy
who had PTSD before this.
>> Mhm.
Do you remember the first contact you
had with him after he got his warrant?
>> Um I I mean I remember some of it. I
mean he was very focused on fighting,
you know. He was very focused on
fighting it and he was very worried
about his family. He was super worried
about his mom
and his grandson and his wife. So he was
very focused on them. And he also
said, you know, I've had the greatest
lawyers. We're going to keep fighting
this. I mean, look, he was anxious. He
was really starting to fall apart, but
he was also trying to be focused on
hope.
[Music]
My name is Malcolm Glabwell. You're
listening to the Alabama Murders. This
is the final episode in our series. We
started with the murder of Elizabeth
Senate on Kundog Cemetery Road. And now
we're going to end with what happened in
Kenny Smith's last days. The bizarre and
grotesque final act to the Senate
cascade where the state of Alabama
endeavored to figure out and justify
another way of executing Kenny Smith.
This is episode 7, the second warrant.
[Music]
Just over a month before Kenny Smith's
second execution date, his legal team
made one last big push to save his life.
A lawsuit heard in US District Court in
Montgomery, Alabama. Kenneth Eugene
Smith v. John Q. Ham. Ham, the
defendant, is the commissioner of the
Alabama Department of Corrections.
Bulldog of a guy, maybe 6 feet, bald,
white mustache and goatee, dark suit,
white shirt, red tie. If you're curious
about Ham, you can find him on YouTube
where he's a regular.
He's the person in Alabama's state
government whose job it is to stand up
at press conferences and announce that
one of his prisons has just executed
another person.
by owner of the Alabama Supreme Court.
Tonight, the state of Alabama carried
out the execution of James Barber by
lethal injection at William St. Hol.
>> He answers questions about how things
went.
>> How many IVs did you need to have in
him, too? Had two. So, there was three
sticks and six
>> and lets the world know they've done
their job well. So we carried out a
successful execution of the headm
[Music]
Ham.
This is who Kenny Smith's legal team is
up against. The basis of their appeal
was a new method that Alabama intended
to use on Kenny Smith. Having lost
confidence in the ability of its
execution team to find one of Kenny
Smith's veins, the state decided instead
to strap him to a gurnie, put a mask
over his face, and pump him full of
nitrogen gas, a method that had never
been used in a judicial execution before
in the United States, or for that matter
anywhere. They were attempting to make
history. And in response, Kenny Smith's
lawyers argued that the use of an
untested method like nitrogen
asphyxiation would violate the eth
amendment prohibition against cruel and
unusual punishment. They wanted a
preliminary injunction.
Tell me a little bit about um nitrogen
gas.
>> It's not in its pure form. It's not
used, you know, in medical situations.
This is Joel Zivet, the Atlanta
anesthesiologist, who we've heard from
many times in this series. You know, in
the air we breathe,
air is actually is a mixture of about
79%
or 80% nitrogen and 20 21% oxygen. Why
don't we breathe pure oxygen? If the
atmosphere of the earth was pure oxygen,
it would be on fire and we there would
be no life. So to make it kind of work
in the body, we have to water it down so
to speak with nitrogen gas.
>> We breathe in oxygen which keeps us
alive mixed in with enough nitrogen to
make it safe. Nitrogen is inert. It just
passes in and out of the body
>> like uh it it doesn't kind of hurt to
inhale it. Um but what it does do is
that it doesn't um you know it doesn't
light the fire of life. it doesn't
support the cellular combustion that is
required with oxygen. Um, so it's like
putting the candle, you know, under the
glass and the candle eventually uses up
all the oxygen and nothing remains.
So the theory was that because nitrogen
gas was not noxious, it would be could
be given to someone uh as a kind of you
know method of of gas execution that
would not be so troubling to them
because they would breathe it and not
know it and that they would then lose
consciousness and die.
All you needed was some pure
industrial-grade nitrogen gas and a
tight fitting mask. That was the theory
and the great appeal of nitrogen to a
state like Alabama where the execution
teams were not always up to the
challenge of executing people the
conventional way. But in practice, there
are complications. Like if some oxygen
seeps into your mask while you're being
fed nitrogen, then you could end up in a
vegetative state, alive but brain dead.
There's also the possibility, since pure
nitrogen makes people nauseous, that the
prisoner being executed could throw up
in their mask and choke to death, which
achieves the same end. But inducing
someone to esphyxiate on their own vomit
is not a Supreme Court approved method
of execution as yet.
So like in lethal injection, you know,
once the vein is canulated and the drugs
are flowing, it's hard to stop. Okay?
You can't kind of block your own vein or
do something. But in in gas execution,
you have to participate in your own
demise by breathing. Okay? So the first
thing that you're going to do is that
you hold your breath. Okay? because you
don't want to breathe. So now you're
holding your breath. You're holding your
breath. And as you hold your breath, uh
your own uh carbon dioxide uh gas, which
is something that we normally exhale and
sort of finally regulated, starts to
rise. And it's the rising of carbon
dioxide that is very uncomfortable. When
you hold your breath, it makes you want
to take a breath. So that starts to at
some point you can't stand it. Okay? And
you've got to take a breath. So you
breathe in at that point. Once you
breathe in this nitrogen gas that you
know has a very different kind of impact
on on what's happened to you because by
virtue of holding your breath it dilates
the blood vessels in the brain. Okay. So
now you've got this flush of nitrogen
gas that's traveling, you know, at
volume into your brain. That may be why
you have a seizure. And it seems to
create a cascade of other kinds of
physiologic changes, none of which is
instantaneous unconsciousness followed
by death.
The effectiveness of nitrogen gas as a
euthanizing agent has actually been
extensively studied in animals. A group
of researchers in Zurich, for example,
recently took 60 rats, implanted them
with biomedical sensors, divided them
into groups, each with a different
lethal method. Carbon dioxide, a
powerful anesthetic called isofllorane,
carbon monoxide,
and nitrogen.
They euthanized all the animals,
videotaped their final moments,
necropsied the bodies, and collected
cardiovascular, respiratory, neural,
biochemical, hisystological, and
behavioral data. Their conclusion,
carbon monoxide, and nitrogen resulted
in longer times to loss of
consciousness, induced seizures before
loss of consciousness, increased stress
levels, and caused higher lung damage.
Therefore, carbon monoxide and nitrogen
are not humane alternatives and should
not be used for euthanasia.
They weren't talking about the
applicability of their findings to human
beings. They were simply addressing
their colleagues who use lab animals for
research purposes. They were telling
them, "Even the smallest and most
despised of animals deserve some degree
of consideration. Please don't use
nitrogen. A rat deserves a better way to
die.
So this was the point of the final
lawsuit. Kenny Smith's lawyers wanted to
know, had John Ham and his colleagues
thought about this new method of killing
people with anything like the rigor of
the lab ratrack community.
[Music]
December 20th, 2023.
It's a month before Kenny Smith's second
execution date. John Q Ham took the
stand in the morning. He began by laying
out Alabama's proposed protocol. They
would be using, he said, the same
execution chamber as the lethal
injection attempt, the same gurnie. The
execution team would have the same
captain. 10 of the 12 members of the
execution team would be the same. Each
step of the protocol would be the same.
The only difference would be no IV this
time, just a mask hooked up to a
canister of pure nitrogen. The
cross-examination was handled by one of
Kenny Smith's lawyers, Andrew Burns
Johnson, out of Birmingham.
Can you tell the court what deliberation
you had relating to what to do in the
circumstance of vomiting in the mask
when nitrogen is being applied? Answer.
We just had conversations about like I
said sitting around hypotheticals. So we
sat around and we came up with those
ideas or excuse me the side effects. So
what we would do in that situation?
Question. Did you consider that vomiting
in a mask could cause esphyxiation?
Answer: Yes, sir. Question. Did you
consult with any medical personnel about
how to lessen that risk? Answer: No,
sir. Did you talk to any medical
personnel about how to alleviate that
risk? No, sir. Did you talk to any
medical personnel about what to do in
that situation as it's happening to
prevent asphyxiation?
I did not.
I can only imagine what was going
through the mind of Kenny Smith's lawyer
in that moment. Is it bafflement?
Disbelief? I mean, for goodness sake, a
research team in Zurich went to enormous
effort to figure out whether nitrogen
was worthy of lab rats. Could the
Alabama State Department of Corrections,
an organization with a budget of over
$700 million,
really just be winging it?
Wait, we're not finished.
Question. Okay, you certainly had
medical personnel available to you to
ask that question. Answer: I could have
sought out medical advice. Yes.
Question. Okay. Did the state have
medical personnel involved in this
process of developing this protocol that
you signed? Answer: The Department of
Corrections did not have medical
personnel involved.
Question: Were you ever involved in
meetings with medical personnel where
the issue of vomiting in the mask was
discussed at all? Answer: No, sir.
Question. Have you had an opportunity to
review the declarations of the experts
in this case who talk about the effects
of vomiting in the mask? Answer, I have
not.
This goes on and on. By the way, other
witnesses from the state of Alabama get
called. Has anyone thought about what
would happen if outside air came into
the mask? No. Where did you get that
mask, by the way? Well, they don't
really make masks for execution
purposes, do they? So, we're using an
industrial mask, the kind that a
construction worker might use. We did
some internet research.
Literally, the person who the state
asked to figure out the mask question,
who they brought to the hearing to
support their case, admitted that he'd
never used these kinds of masks, had no
expertise in the characteristics of
these masks, and knew what he knew
because he'd spent some time online.
Kenny Smith's lawyer then brings up the
testimony of a previous witness who had
stressed the importance of the mask
fitting perfectly so no outside air
would leak in and asks John Q Ham about
it
question. So in order to be properly
placed one would have to ensure that
there's no outside air coming in answer
that was his opinion question. Okay,
assuming his opinion is correct, what's
done in the execution chamber to make
sure that no outside air gets under the
mask? Answer: Well, that's a
hypothetical on his opinion being
correct. Question, even so, what is done
to make sure no outside air comes in?
Answer: I don't know specifically what
the team captain does to make sure the
air does not get in, but I'm sure they
they do practice quite regular.
Question. Do you agree with me there's
nothing in the protocol that would let
us know what's going to happen to make
sure there's a proper fit? Answer.
That is correct.
Later in the day, Kate Porterfield was
called to the stand. She had spent more
than a year assessing Kenny Smith. She
had submitted her report to the court.
She probably knew more than anyone at
that moment what he was feeling and how
he was doing and how he might react to
being re-executed by the same crew on
the same gurnie in the same execution
chamber as the first goound. But do you
know what she was asked at the beginning
of her cross-examination by the attorney
for the Alabama Department of
Corrections? Had she properly accounted
for the possibility that Kenny might be
mingering?
What if all that PTSD stuff that he
claimed was about being jabbed with
needles for three and a half hours was
just him faking it? A long technical
discussion follows about how you can
tell if someone's actually faking it.
And from there, the questioning moved to
the vomit issue.
>> And astonishingly,
oh gosh, the focus of that hearing,
this is how what where the legal system
sometimes is just you can't make it up.
this stuff that they that becomes the
issue because he had to have a mask over
his face to get the gas for nitrogen
hypoxia execution. And sorry, the
details of this are gross.
His lawyers argued he is because of his
post-traumatic stress going to possibly
throw up. And if he throws up in his
mask, it's going to be, you know, he
could get us fixiated that way. Now, of
course, you are listening and thinking
this is so like talk about absurd,
right? So, I was asked to testify about
his post-traumatic stress and his
nausea, which was one of his symptoms.
Um, and you know,
I was asked to testify, would he throw
up if they put a mask on his face and
tried to kill him,
which, you know,
it's
just
incredible to be asked that in a court
of law. And I had to say, you know, I'm
not a medical doctor, first of all, so I
can't speak to the gastrointestinal
system and what it does. I can tell you
as a psychologist from the kind of
severe post-traumatic stress and the
fact that Mr. Smith's had really severe
nausea and some vomiting there is a high
likelihood that could happen. Yes,
because he's going to go into a serious
state of distress, but it kind of boiled
down to whether or not he would, you
know, vomit
as whether he they could stop this. And
they, you know, the judge said the judge
said, "Don't let him eat 8 hours before
That's what they did. Moved the last
meal earlier.
And with that, Kenny's fate was set.
In the months leading up to his
execution date, Kenny Smith began to put
his affairs in order. In his words, he
loved up on everybody. He named his
witnesses. He wanted his family there.
His mom, his wife, his sons, his
spiritual adviser, his lawyer, Robert
Grass. So tell me about that evening.
>> So
uh I arrived I was supposed to uh go to
the prison at 5. So I got there at 5.
>> Everyone on the list arrived at home and
prison on the afternoon of January 25th.
The corrections department gathered them
and put them in a van to drive to the
execution chamber.
>> At some point it started to rain and you
could hear on the roof, you know, you
could hear the rain falling on the roof.
>> They emptied their pockets. No watches,
no phones. At 652, one of the drivers of
the van got a phone call. It was moving
time. A police car with flashing lights
led the way through a gate at the back
of the prison. From there to a holding
room, another wait, maybe an hour. Lee
Hedgepath, the local reporter who did
some interviews for us, was there. So
was Kenny Smith's mom, Linda.
He'd survived that first attempt. Did
you think there was any chance that he
would survive the second time?
>> No, I really didn't.
Did you
>> I I don't know. Part part of me thought
we might all die cuz they didn't know
what they were doing. It was the first
time it had ever been done.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, he's got a mask that leaks and
>> I don't know.
>> Somehow I just knew that that was that
was going to be it. And when he well he
said when he seen I'm coming he said
well mom they're coming to get me
and you know we said our good pies and
you know the last thing he said was I
love you mom
I got to go.
>> So the last time he saw him was when I
was there in that room and he they come
and get him. Mhm.
>> Do you remember? Is that what he said to
you then, too?
>> Mhm.
>> What do you remember what you said to
him?
>> I told him I loved him, too.
He said, "I know, Mom."
And then I just can't get that picture
out of my head when he's they're walking
him back. And he looked back and he was
just smiling.
Yeah,
>> that haunts me.
>> At some point, everyone was led to the
witness room.
A curtain was drawn by the windows.
There were four seats in the front which
we took. There was a
box of tissues to um my right um near
the window sill or on a a window sill.
Um
and then uh
little after that they opened the
curtain.
Um we could see uh Kenny uh strapped to
a gurnie. He was strapped across his
chest. His arms were strapped um to the
side and he was wearing a mask. The
warden entered the room. He read the
death warrant.
He asked Kenny if he had if he wanted to
make a statement,
which he did.
So they put the microphone, they
unscrewed a valve to the mask, they put
the microphone near him and he made his
statement. Warden then left the room.
>> What did he say?
Uh he said something along the lines of
that Alabama was taking a step backwards
that evening and he said, "I love you
all. I'm going with peace and
I I forget exactly what it was, but it
was something along those lines."
Uh
the warden left the room and then um
they started the procedure or at least
that that's what it seemed like and that
was uh
you know pretty ugly to watch because uh
Kenny they had been saying all along
that Kenny would be unconscious in you
know seconds you know less than a it and
this would
be a a painless thing. I'm not a medical
person. I can't opine on the
on what happened. The only one who can
tell us if he experienced pain is not
here to describe it. Um
but what I observed anyhow did not look
like what Alabama had advertised because
there were um
violent
seizure type movements. Um you know was
kind of as best he could against the
constraints. You could see his head come
back and violently come forward and
violently go back. You could see his
fist clenched and his arms
um
straining against the restraints and as
I said I didn't have my watch and I
wasn't
cognizant if there was a clock in the
room but I can tell you that that went
on you know that was minutes not seconds
that that appeared to be going on there
was what appeared to be
um gasping for air after that for again
another period of um you know minutes
not not seconds.
Uh
at um
at some point you could see him kind of
fall back into on you know into the
gurnie and and lay there. Um
then they uh escorted us out of the
witness room, took us back, put us back
in the van and brought us back to the
parking lot where we had gathered.
And um
and that was that evening.
[Music]
Can you describe your
feelings when it was over?
>> It's hard to
describe. You know, that was about
18 years of effort that ended up being
unsuccessful.
I felt
[Music]
awful about that. I felt awful for um
for Kenny. I felt awful for Kenny's
wife, his children, his mother, his
extended family. He had, you know,
grandchildren by that point, nieces,
nephews. The point of the 18 years
of representation was basically to avoid
to prevent that moment.
>> Do you miss him?
>> I do. Um
I actually, you know, I think about him.
His birthday was uh July 4th. Um,
[Music]
so I was thinking about him then and I
think about him
uh often.
[Music]
Can you tell me a little bit more about
Sorry.
I'm sorry. You know, I wish I could
every time I tell this story, I wish I
could tell it with a different ending
and a different beginning for that
matter.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Tonight,
the state of Alabama started carrying
out the execution of Kenneth Eugene
Smith by nitrogen epoxia at the William
C. Homeman Correctional Facility. Smith
was executed for the 1988 capital murder
of Elizabeth Dorene Senate in Colbert
County.
After it was all over, John Qam, the
commissioner of the Alabama Department
of Corrections, held a press conference,
as he always does, podium, big banner
right behind him with the words,
"Professionalism,
integrity, accountability."
Charles and Elizabeth Senate's two sons
stand off to the side.
>> Commissioner, Mr. Smith appeared to
shake and ride on the gun for at least 2
minutes at the start of the execution.
Was that expected?
>> Uh appeared that one Smith was holding
his breath as long as he could and then
uh there's also information out there of
u he struggled against his restraints a
little bit but there's some involuntary
movement and some agnal breathing. So uh
that was all expected and it's in the um
side effects that we've seen of
researched on nitrogen epoxia.
>> So nothing was out of the or what we
were expecting. Nothing out of the
ordinary, just what they were expecting.
Then more questions.
>> He um appeared conscious for the first
several minutes. Do you agree with that?
The attorney general's office in Fort
Filing said they thought the nitrogen
would cause a lack of consciousness
within seconds.
>> I don't know. I couldn't really see his
face from where I was sitting. Y'all
might have had a better view of that.
>> Any plans to implement the smoke method
for future inmates on death row?
Uh that's not our this is the state law
for the state of Alabama that nitrogen
epoxy is one of the three methods of
execution. So the inmates choose it then
that's the method we will use.
Then came a press release from the
Alabama Attorney General's office.
Alabama has achieved something historic.
It went on, "Despite the international
effort by activists to undermine and
disparage our state's justice system and
to deny justice to the victims of
heinous murders, our proven method
offers a blueprint for other states and
a warning to those who would contemplate
shedding innocent blood. This is an
important night for Liz Sennet's family,
for justice, and for the rule of law in
our great nation.
A man has an affair and in his madness
sees no alternative but to kill his
wife. He recruits two troubled young men
who take the fall. Both of those men are
redeemed while in prison. They discover
their capacity to love and to be loved,
but that is of no concern for the state
of Alabama, which executes the first by
setting his lungs on fire and executes
the second twice. first in spirit and
then in fact, letting him convulse on
the gurnie because no one bothered to
check whether a method that is not even
worthy of lab rats was a good idea for
human beings.
The cascade begins in obliviousness,
then proceeds from indifference to
cruelty and ends in revision.
When a senior elected official of an
American state looks back over a 36-year
long cascade of moral failure and
declares without irony,
Alabama has achieved something historic.
Do you remember the last conversation
you had with him?
>> We still were very much talking about
what his options were and legally and I
didn't know it was going to be my last
conversation with him, you know. So once
it got very close to the warrant, I had
said, you know, I'm here. Anybody would
like me to do anything to assist with
this post-traumatic stress or anything,
please contact me, you know, and but he
started to really have to focus on what
he was about to do, you know, what was
about to happen to him. So I wrote him a
letter at the end and I sent it to him.
Uh I just wrote him a little paragraph
and I just said um that what it had
meant to work with him. I gave it to him
I guess the day before and I just said
you know your spirit is just you know
irrepressible and your I I did say I
liked this cuz it it was true of Kenny.
I said your ability to build
relationships behind walls is nothing
less than miraculous.
because that's really what I felt about
him. You know, he built relationships,
real ones, with his loved ones.
>> And that's not easy. It's not easy when
we're not in prison.
You know,
>> where were you when he was finally
executed?
>> Oh, I was home.
So, I Yeah, I have this thing I do where
I, you know, I talk to the lawyers
always before and say where I'll be and
stuff. obviously if anyone needs me. Um,
and then I usually tell my kids and
we're going to light a candle and we
light a candle for the person and
usually I put some something pretty with
the candle and then take a picture of it
and I always send the picture of the
candle to the lawyers and just say, you
know, I'm remembering Kenny right now
and whatever he's going through and
then I usually
have a glass of wine and feel like [__]
What are you thinking? May I ask?
I'm sorry.
It's a lot to think about
and
you know the normal thing we do we make
meaning
is we think about other losses. We think
you think about what the person's family
went through. You think what you would
go through if that was happening, you
know? So, it's this is what being a
human is. It's like when you put your
mind in this place,
it's a lot. It's a lot.
[Music]
Revisionist History is produced by Lucy
Sullivan, Bened Haffrey, and Nina Bird
Lawrence. Additional reporting by Ben
Denafhaffrey and Lee Hedgebbeth. Our
editor is Karen Shakuri. Fact-checking
by Kate Furby. Our executive producer is
Jacob Smith. Production support from
Luke Clement.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence.
Original music was composed, arranged,
and recorded by Luis Gara with
additional composition and recording by
Paul Brainer. Drums by Jimmy Bot. Sound
design and additional music by Jake
Gorski. Cover art for this season was
designed by Shan Carney. And special
thanks to a whole host of people who
helped us out. The good folks at Audible
who came to our table reads, Taly Emlin,
Randy Suskin at the Equal Justice
Initiative in Montgomery who helped us
out with research, Mike Culie of the
Drive by Truckers, Anna Pushkin, Greta
Conn, Jacob Weissberg, Sarah Nicks,
Nicole Optonbos, Jasmine Fino, Christina
Sullivan, Amy Gaines, McUade, Grace
Rost, Eric Sandler, Morgan Ratner, Kira
Posey, Jordan McMillan, Jake Flanigan,
Owen Miller, Farad Grunge,
and Sarah Bugare. I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
[Music]